support for this segment and the
following message provided by freak out
and carry on a new podcast about
politics through the lens of history
hosted by journalist Ron Susskind and
the story in Heather Cox Richardson
available wherever you get podcasts and
on The WB you are listen app from WBUR
boston and NPR I'm Tom Ashbrook and this
is on point
investigative reporter Robert Perry has
been around the block a few times back
in the 1980s even his own editors
sometimes had a hard time believing what
he on earth the White House disobeyed
Congress and smuggled arms to Iran so
they would fund the right-wing army in
Central America no way yes way and Perry
proved it and a lot more he's just won
the if' stone medal for journalistic
independence and he's thinking about the
US news media and the story it tells us
of reality this our OnPoint
award-winning investigative reporter
Robert Perry from the American press and
America's understanding of itself and
the world you can join us on air or
online where this conversation is always
on do you get what you need
from the US news media the American
press are you sure join us anytime at
OnPoint radio org or on Twitter and
Facebook at OnPoint radio joining me now
from Washington is reporter Robert Perry
editor of consortium news the first
investigative news magazine on the
internet back in the mid 90s you won the
George Polk award for his reporting on
the iran-contra affair breaking many of
the stories as the scandal unfolded the
most recent of his many books is
America's stolen narrative from
Washington and Madison to Nixon Reagan
and the bushes to Obama that title
itself gives you an idea of where we're
headed today Perry has just won the if'
stone medal for journalistic
independence presented by the Nieman
Foundation I was there for the awarding
of the medal and thought you might want
to hear from this man Robert Perry
welcome to one point thank you very much
for joining us today
well thank you Tom I really want to go
back and look at some of the moments of
digging that you've done
in your long career as an investigative
reporter but I wish you'd unfold some of
your own thesis here on America's stolen
narrative the title of your last book
how did the country's narrative get
stolen and what is the performance of
the news media have to do with that well
there's an effort by many people in
various positions of power to get the
American people to believe what makes
the most sense for the people in power
to want them to believe and we've seen
this really evolving during my period in
Washington from the 1970s when if you
think back to that time just after the
Vietnam War there was the Pentagon
Papers we then had the Watergate scandal
we then had disclosures about the CIA
secret operations including
assassinations the so-called family
jewels and and those were all sort of
coming out at that time and reached the
point that the American people were very
distrustful of their government it was
very hard for the government to get the
American people riled up again to go
into more foreign adventures and that
was a challenge that was facing the
government when Ronald Reagan becomes
president in the 1980s and we now can
see from many of the classified records
from that era that the Reagan people
took this all very seriously they had
this goal of what they call kicking the
Vietnam syndrome and the way they did it
was to try to get the American people to
believe in a world that wasn't really
there it was it was a propagandized
extreme version of the world out there
and and by doing that to get the
American people more ready to have more
support for wars in the future there was
a there was even an effort early on in
the Reagan administration to bring in
CIA experts people who were used to
targeting foreign countries with
propaganda and disinformation and bring
them into the White House and have them
set up similar programs for the American
public it was headed by a fellow named
Walter Raymond Jr who was the top
propagandist at the CIA he was sent over
by his boss William Casey
the director and he set up at the
National Security Council
these efforts to have interagency task
forces to figure out how best to sell
these issues to the American people and
and the advice he always gave to his
subordinates was to glue black hats on
America's enemies and glue white hats on
the groups that the American government
was supporting in the case of the
Contras in Nicaragua those are the
rebels fighting the leftist government
in Nicaragua the Sandinistas his advice
was to glue the black hats on the
Sandinistas and to glue the white hats
on the Contras and so you had you had
this issue framed is the the Contras
were the moral equals of the founding
fathers in a phrase that Reagan was
scripted troops to read and the
Sandinistas in Nicaragua was a
totalitarian dungeon so you had this
mythology that was pushed to sort of
create these almost fictional characters
as a way to get the American people back
in line so they would begin to support
these efforts
going forward and we've seen how that's
evolved since then as it's been sort of
a bipartisan effort to to really
manipulate the American people there was
a phrase that the Reagan folks like to
use called perception management they
had to manage the perceptions of the
American people about the world around
us so it was really an effort through
using propaganda and the US news media
to get the American people back under
some control so they would rally to
things like as we now see in the Iraq
war in the just last decade and always
the same kinds of approaches the enemies
always are wearing black hats the US
side is always wearing white hats but
that's not really the reality so in a
sense that their true narrative the true
reality out there has been stripped away
on behalf of the interests of the
powerful forces in Washington who want
to maintain a large military budget or
want to get the u.s. involved in some of
these foreign adventures you bring that
right up to date in your book America's
stolen narrative you assert that kind of
false history in
effect entrapped barack obama huh well I
think it's been true of some of the
Democrats that they that they have been
often unwilling to press for the truth
about Republicans there's a great great
much greater timidity on the part of
Democrats as we've seen over the years
they tend to want to see let bygones be
bygones move on to more pragmatic issues
so for instance after the end of the the
the Reagan Bush one years you had a
number of still pending scandals where
the truth had not had really not been
had not been developed iran-contra we
still did not know about and that's the
remarkable scandal where where the
Reagan administration secretly sold arms
to the Iranians often through Israel and
then some of the profits went back to
the Contras in Nicaragua but we never
even quite figured out where that
started and the history was in a sense
truncated because when we get to the
period of the early 90s there was a loss
of interest in trying to find the real
truth and then after Bill Clinton
becomes president
there was an idea well let's just let
that be slide into the history would
just would just go forward and we saw
something similar with President Obama
when he took office he said we have to
look forward not backward
so the crimes committed during the bush
to administration torture the whole
reasons for the Iraq war all these very
important issues to really determine
what it had actually happened they were
sort of set aside even though even in
Britain you had much more interest in
trying to figure out how Great Britain
got involved in the Iraq war you have
the Chilcott Commission for instance but
in the United States there was nothing
like that there was no serious review
how the Iraq war happened there are a
few pieces of it because the some of the
Senate committees like looked at the
torture issue but it was all very
limited and not the kind of serious
effort that one might expect from a real
democracy robert Parry you talk about
the White House especially under
Ronald Reagan looking back at the 70s
the American people kind of being off
the reservation or you know not taking
the bit not taking the harness at one of
them back into a kind of control wanted
to use perception management to do that
and using your word using US news media
to corral the American view of the world
again in this media typically presents
itself is not something to be used but
rather you know as as the body that will
be the watchdog in our society of what's
going on so use how well I think that's
the old view of the press and I'm sure
many people really view it that way
today the if you go back to the 70s
there was there wasn't exactly what's
not a real golden era but let's just say
it was an era when the press was doing
its job more responsibly digging into
some serious issues of government
criminality whether it be lying to get
the country into the Vietnam War the
Pentagon Papers which were published by
the New York Times and Washington Post
and other major news organizations and
then you had the Watergate scandal which
is of somewhat of a follow on scandal
really to to to the Pentagon Papers we
now know that they were they were
essentially linked in because Nixon was
afraid that some of his lies about the
Vietnam War would also come out which
led him to be sort of paranoid and and
set up the plumbers unit unit in the
first place so we have so we have so we
have this idea that the press was doing
its job more or less back then but it
had to be also reined in and during the
Reagan era there was a very serious
effort to bring us under control I was
at The Associated Press for most promote
to that time and later Newsweek and what
I saw was there was there was also there
was pressure on the press and in a
fairly sophisticated way but there also
was at the higher levels of the news
media a sense that maybe things had gone
too far in the 70s and that that it
wasn't quote good for the country a
phrase that I would hear often and that
it might be best if the press didn't
write so critically about the government
the people that were running the press
time or people I dealt with in the news
media people like a Keith fuller at at
The Associated Press or Maynard Parker
at Newsweek these people really shared
many of the views of a more aggressive
US foreign policy the US standing tall
in the world they were less about
informing the people of all the facts
than sort of making sure the public
didn't think too badly of some of these
policies so what we ended up with was
both externally from the Reagan
administration at the time and they had
many allies in that had attacked groups
that went after some of us groups like
accuracy and media for instance but
there was also a sense that the higher
levels of the news media that that maybe
the press should get a bit lighter on
terms of looking at these dirty secrets
of the US government
[Music]
I'm Tom Ashbrook this is on point for
talking this hour with investigative
journalist Robert Perry 2015 winner of
the if' stone medal for journalistic
independent named after the great
muckraking journalist if' stone very
prominent in the years when robert Parry
was coming up and into the business
published if' stones
weekly self-published newsletter for
many years gadfly in washington
independent journalist kind of the
definition thereof we're looking at the
state of the American news media today
and what we don't know about our own
country's story it's living history
Robert Perry is author of America's
stole and narrative neck-deep secrecy
and privilege trick or treason fooling
America and many more joins us today
from Washington you can join us as well
do you feel like you're getting the
whole unvarnished story and what's going
on from the American news media today is
that too much to ask
should we have known much earlier about
the October Surprise all the way back
when Ronald Reagan was elected should we
have known about the CIA and cocaine
trafficking in the 1980s what's the
missing history as you see it today the
lack of understanding can trap the
American people in American leaders he
was a President Obama Barack Obama
January 2009 at his inaugural to all the
other peoples and governments who are
watching today from the grandest
capitals to the small village where my
father was born know that America is a
friend of each nation and every man
woman and child who seeks a future of
peace and dignity and we are ready to
lead once more there Barack Obama being
inaugurated Robert Perry says if you
don't know your history if you don't
know what's happened you don't know
what's going on even now maybe even if
you're the President of the United
States Robert we have callers for you
Scott and Milton Massachusetts Scott
you're on the air with investigative
reporter Robert Perry it's hi Tom thanks
for taking the call I just this morning
was reading an article that the idea of
perception management comes so
clearly to me it's the New York Times
article on the Russians suspiciously
being around the internet internet
intercontinental cable the undersea
cables saying there's been a lot of a
Russian submarine activity there Scott
yes and I was just thinking the
structure of the article could have been
so much different it looks like we've
had a program since 1971 of extracting
information from these same cables but I
just wondered who who's responsible for
creating the layout of such an article
in a way that is fear-mongering and also
supports more military hardware it
mentioned about the Russians capacity to
have very high-tech ships to work at sea
extracting this information Scott let us
pick it up Robert Peary there's a story
right out of today's headlines one might
look at that and say well why not
understand that Russians are active
around internet cables which are so
important to so much communication these
days but Scott's picking up on your
concern about presentation and
perception management what do you say
well sure I think he's correct to be
concerned about that I think there has
been an effort to I guess you might say
glue black hats on the Russians and on
President Putin these days you know
sometimes it's easier to talk about
these things in a bit more distance when
they're happening it's extremely hard to
write honestly about these you know
international conflicts where where the
US government has betrayed someone is a
real bad guy and and and and usually
there's some truth to that it's not like
the first person with a black hat it
deserves a white hat necessarily but
this idea of hyping these fears of the
American people is been part of what
this whole idea has been if you go back
to those those days in the early 1980s
you have to make the American people
frightened of things and if you can make
them frightened of these foreign enemies
of and they can be made ten feet tall
they can they can be wildly exaggerated
in terms of how dangerous they are then
the American people are more susceptible
to voting for more military hardware the
military-industrial complex does very
well thank you
and the and then so you have
also have inside the news media and this
has been an increasing development to
the group that we would might call the
neoconservatives who've come out of that
period of the late 70s and early 80s I
knew some of them when they were being
their real pups they were just coming
into their own like I guess I was but
the and they became they became more and
more influential they were they're very
smart they're very well well educated
well-read and they are good at working
it up on a top on up edie pages they
work for think tanks that are quite
prominent and get a lot of space and
eventually they began to increasingly
take over some you know key positions in
the news media we have for instance the
Washington Post editorial page is pretty
heavily run by the neoconservatives
these days so so you do have that
influencing the the kind of coverage
we've seen on a number of these issues
and clearly one of the top ones right
now is to make the American people angry
and and frightened of the Russians and
not to say there's not some reality
there but a lot of it has been hyped
much as we've seen as we saw before the
Iraq war when we were told that Saddam
Hussein who certainly was no white hat
but he was but he was made into some
worse than Hitler kind of monster who
was going to be handing nuclear weapons
off to al Qaeda and it was it was much
of that was fiction as we now know and
so we should always be very skeptical I
think when we're in these moments when
the government is and even the news
media reflecting the views of the
government starts pushing these extreme
themes about foreign enemies because
that's when we get really wrapped up
into some of these more destructive
actions that they do not do not serve
the American national interests well at
all and totally not the democracy Robert
Pera we should take us back to some kind
of just a facts ma'am a recollection of
how this worked when you were doing some
of your biggest investigative reporting
and I know it goes on to this day but
take us back to iran-contra the CIA and
how it got involved in cocaine trade and
what it was like to be a reporter in the
middle of that how you winkled those
stories out and the reception they got
when you took them to your press bosses
at the time well when I was with The
Associated Press I was assigned to the
special assignment team at the end of
1980s attention essentially the
beginning of the Reagan era and that was
their investigative unit and I focused a
good deal on their Central America
policy the Reagan Central American
policy because it was a key issue that
they were concerned about and it was one
write soon began to become aware that
they were wildly exaggerating some of
the threats from Central America they
were we were seeing this hyped up idea
that the Cubans were going to come
through Nicaragua and then up through
Mexico and into Texas it was there was a
lot of over-the-top kind of excessive
fear-mongering that was going on
considering the nature of the actual
problem or threat so so my reporting
tended to reflect that skepticism
because what I was finding was a lot
less alarmist and what the Reagan
administration was trying to sell so
there was a certain amount of friction
there both with the Reagan
administration and some of my executives
at The Associated Press
I mentioned the general manager Keith
Fuller believed very deeply that we
should support the Reagan policies that
he felt that that this was an important
turning point in America away from what
kind of more defeatist 1970s attitude to
a more America standing tall attitude of
the 1980s he was he was excited by that
and he wanted his reporters to kind of
be in line with that you're reporting
led to the uncovering of iran-contra of
the CIA cocaine connection how do you
get there well so basically when it came
to the as we were as I kept following
the the issues of the Sandinistas in
Nicaragua and their contra were being
supported by the Central Intelligence
Agency with there were more and more
scandals that were involved the Contras
were not the white hats they weren't the
Mohicans of the founding fathers that
was all propaganda so I discovered
things like the there were some manuals
that were being prepared by the CIA for
the Contras including one that advocated
assassinations and setting up
that essentially false flag
assassinations of their own people to
blame it on the other side so there were
things like that that we're that upset
the Congress when they became out and
the Congress cut off funding for the for
the Contras and forbade the Reagan
administration from continuing these
policies the Reagan people then chose to
go under take it under cover in defiance
of Congress in defiance really of the
Constitution that gives the Congress of
central control over whether we wage war
or not and they did it secretly through
private funding and and in following
those the money for that there was there
were there were private donors there was
third there were third countries kicking
in and that's where when I was working
with by and barger my race very talented
colleague at AP we we discovered that
they also the Contras also were getting
funding and support from their
involvement in the drug trade the the
midian cartel and other drug traffickers
were using the cover the Contra movement
to get some of their product into the
United States and so by the end of late
late 1985 we had put that story together
we had a couple of dozen sources we had
documents we even had a source inside
the National Security Council who read
to me some from a CIA report confirming
parts of this so we had we had DEA
officials who were confirming it done
background so we went we tried to go
with that story and the the AP
management up in up in New York really
didn't didn't want the story so there
was a point when I we thought we had it
cleared for approval I send it in to the
bureau chief at in Washington with his
initials at the top and he and I thought
we were ready to go with it and then he
came out sheepishly and said well no
they decided not to do it and this was
the story not the original of
iran-contra but of the CIA cocaine
connection were to this bright this is
about the Contras being involved in the
cocaine trade and basically all the
major country groups there are a number
there were several groups involved but
all of them had gotten involved with the
cocaine trade and we had it nailed and
the heavy age was aware of this and was
not intervening by the CIA and the
they both were aware this was a problem
but they treated it as a public
relations issue really they did not want
to have they really saw the the fight
the Cold War the having this the Contras
there to fight the Sandinistas is more
important than protecting the American
public from this these drugs coming in
but but as far as the AP story was it
ended up going accidentally really to
the Spanish language side of AP when
they and they simply translated it and
put it out not reef not realizing there
was this other battle going on at the
top levels of the company and then when
that happened we were i brother
sheepishly when i found out there that
had happened i went into the bureau
chief and said well it seems the story
didn't talk about in spanish and so they
did put the story out in english as well
go upstream from there for us back to
how the whole iran-contra connection
came out the reporting that went into
that arms being traded but back to iran
cash to the Contras right well we were
we were focused mostly at that time on
the Contra side of things and there was
a disclosure that came out in Beirut you
know basically the iran-contra scandal
breaks in October of 1986 when a when
one of the planes that Oliver North who
was the national security council aide
who was in charge of the program one of
the planes he was using to drop weapons
to the Contras got shot down inside
Nicaragua and it started spilling out
confirming a lot of the stories we'd
been already done in terms of how this
was being run out of the White House
secretly and by the way the White House
was denying everything they were just
lying to the American public so then
about a month later a disclosure comes
out in Beirut about the the issue of the
the Reagan people selling arms to the
Iranians and again this was vociferous
Lee denied by the White House by Reagan
himself by Vice President Bush by others
it turns out that of course it was true
and that eventually was confirmed and
and then it was just discovered that
that some of the profits had gone to the
Contras as well so you had the
the scandal became the iran-contra
scandal but there were further of
several elements do was a complicated
scandal there was money-laundering
involved there really gross violations
of US law involved with both violations
of the arms Export Control Act where
Congress is supposed to be informed when
US weapons are shipped there were
violations of money laundering
regulations and laws so you had a very
serious scandal but the question to me
became over time how did it really start
and as we went deeper into this into the
into the facts of the matter it became
clear that this was not something that
just started in 1985 and 86 like the
official narrative that we just kept
going back in time and it became clear
that Reagan had approved arms sales to
the Iranians as early as early 1981
right after he took office when they had
just had all the American hostages for
so long when the Great Satan and the
huge standoff between these two
countries was so hot right so you had
this very year this this rather
remarkable fact that that just after
those hostages hostages were finally
released they were released on the just
almost the exact same time as Reagan was
inaugurated on January 20th 1981 the
hostages finally released after 444 days
of captivity and the and Reagan pretty
much turned around after that and
approved arms sales to the Iranians via
Israel and as we get as we send these
pieces just weren't really matching up
to what the official story was and that
and that led eventually to people
looking back to the 1980 campaign and
and whether or not the Republicans had
made their initial contacts with the
Iranians even before they took office
before the election in 1980 and whether
or not they had tried to essentially
sabotage President Carter's reelection
efforts by making sure that he did not
resolve the hostage crisis when he
wanted to the so-called October Surprise
never happened but out came the hostages
that here was on January 20th 1981 20
minutes after Ronald Reagan was
inaugurated president the 52 Americans
held
for all that time were released in here
courtesy of NBC News is the new
President Reagan than short time later
at an inaugural event announcing the
hostage release some 30 minutes ago the
planes bearing our prisoners left
Iranian airspace and are now free Robert
Perry followed it all the way back and
you found Republican operatives working
with Iranians maybe working at
cross-purposes with Jimmy Carter the
kind of history that Americans need to
understand to understand the very
leadership of the country yes right the
well we've been able to piece together
now it is obviously a lot more material
available today than there was even 10
20 years ago was that there was a that
there were contacts it's quite clear
between some of the senior Republicans
and the Iranians that it related to the
hostages there are still they're still
legitimate questions about some of the
details as to exactly who did what when
but we have we have now does dozens of
sources really I'm in terms of from key
people in key positions saying that
there were indeed these these contacts
but it's remained a bit of what you
might call lost history in the United
States officially it didn't happen even
though the evidence is now pretty clear
that it did happen and we see something
similar with even like the Contra drug
trafficking issue where where many
people feel that it was that it was a
conspiracy theory that never happened
but the evidence is overwhelming that it
did and we also have now even the CIA
back in when I did a final Inspector
General's report saying yes indeed we
did know about this for a decade and we
didn't do anything about it
[Music]
I'm Tom Ashbrook this is on point we're
talking this hour with investigative
journalist Robert Perry 2015 winner of
the if' stone medal for journalistic
independence about the state of the
American news media today and what we
don't know about our own country's story
it's living history now era Perry joins
us from Washington he is editor of
consortium news consortium news.com you
can join us what's the missing history
today are we asking the hard questions
getting the tough answers what do you
want from the press that you're not
getting let's go straight to Jeffrey in
Miami Florida Jeffrey you're on the air
with Robert Perry I think one of the
balls that got dropped greatly by the
press has been that George Bush trying
to distribute 12 billion dollars of
Saddam Hussein's money took the cash and
brought it into the tribal leaders of
Iraq and I believe that that was the
start of Isis not anything else and so I
believe that the press basically
abandoned that story and left the
general public either to not know about
it or to have very few of us to know
about it and therefore to have little
discussion about it in at all we do
remember I appreciate your call Jeffrey
in Miami we do remember those
photographs of bales of cash flying
around in the in the hold of huge cargo
jets Robert Perry I don't know do you
look there where do you look for what
ought to be more illuminated today and
is not well I think Jeffrey has a good
point the what happened with the
billions of dollars that not just the
Saddam Hussein's money but money that
came from US Treasury and was shipped
over to to Iraq part of what what was
done with that money and according to
intelligence sources was that be that it
was it was paid to some of the Sunni
tribal leaders and some of the former
soldiers who had been decommissioned
from Saddam
his army after the US invasion it was
paid them for them during the surge
period not to attack American troops so
you have going back to 2006 and 2007 you
had large sums of money who they were
that was they were going to these suni
fairly radical but somewhat just you
know military people and that when
things then so they were stockpiled with
lots of cash and then when the when
there when things got worse and worse
between the Sunnis and the Shiites the
Maliki government essentially turning on
the Shiite that did provide some funding
mechanism for the Sunnis to organize and
we now know that group to be the Islamic
state or the Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria they of course then moved into
Syria where they were also carrying on
the struggle between the Sunnis and in
that case an Alawite or offshoot of Shia
Islam and so you had this a sectarian
struggle which the United States really
touched off by invading Iraq and then in
a sense as Jeffrey suggested exacerbated
by in trying to dampen tamp tamp down
the the violence against American
soldiers provided some of the means for
this later to develop into something
else even more dangerous so there were a
lot of unintended consequences in that
and I think it's part of that history
that we've never we've never had a real
examination in the United States it was
an official one of what happened with
the Iraq war it's been left as sort of
an unexplored chapter yes we know
there's have been pieces that have been
broken by various journalists and and
some of we sort of know but there's
never been an effort to do a
comprehensive examination of how how
this happened how these trillions of
dollars were spent overall how the 4500
American soldiers died how the hundreds
of thousands of Iraqis died how and how
this has now spread into becoming not
just a regional problem of
destabilization but is now even reaching
into Europe to destabilize Europe so
it's a very important part of our
history and this does fit to the theme
we've been talking about the America
people have not been given the full
story on by any means we live with the
consequences of untold history Laura in
Lexington Kentucky Laurie you're on the
air
hi thanks for taking my call I just
wanna let you know I really appreciate
your your about reporting thank you for
that my question is are we now
experiencing the most corrupt media in
the history of media that's a pretty big
question pretty broad question
um Laura what why do you put it just
that way well it just seems I asked
there are so many areas of the world
that I'm concerned about that means just
as a person here living my life and the
Sudan and Somalia in Iraq Iran in Russia
I mean it just seems to me that news has
become has become wholesale doubt and
the truth in reporting is homogenized
into something that really just aligns
you know the people who are reporting it
with either either a party or a market
is it are we so manipulated here it's so
easily manipulated by pundits that we
have no you know no idea with what the
truth is
we is fact-checking just something that
we have to do every single day when we
listen to the news um Laura I appreciate
your call and your elaboration there
robert Parry I don't know how far you'll
go here you hear Laura she's got that
great big question and then her
elaboration very interesting well I
think she's basically correct
I guess corrupt is a difficult word
because it suggests something where
you're being paid directly to do
something wrong I think it's a bit more
indirect than that but it's not it's the
concept is correct I think journalists
journalism is I was watching it develop
in the in the 80s and 90s became more
and more commercialized the the way you
got wealthy if you were a journalist was
to become a talking head on TV and Plus
on the other side there was a shrinking
of the number of real news jobs there
were
companies were downsizing consolidating
course then the internet comes on and
many of the many newspapers is shut down
completely so if you were a journalist
you are under enormous pressure to keep
your reporting in line with what the
people at the top of your organization
wanted
if you deviated from that you risked
losing your job or so you're not getting
a promotion being sidetracked and so
there was this there were a number of
factors when going into this and there
was as I say there were there were huge
rewards if you could somehow develop
your reporting and journalism career
into something which had a TV component
and and you could become a kind of a
star on TV and make you know
seven-figure incomes so I mean so that's
what we were kind of faced with and I
think journalists put aside often their
their responsibility to the American
people and looked at it more in terms of
how they could please their bosses and
many of the people at the top level of
news really share the sort of worldview
that you would get from maybe senior
people in on Wall Street or the senior
people in the in the national security
state it was not necessarily the same
idea of what's good for the American
people I sort of the average working
level of the American people was more
what was good for the people at the top
so you had so you did have a failure an
increasing failure of the American press
corps to to ask the tough questions to
be that that watchdog for the public we
certainly saw that with the Iraq war I
think we're seeing it continued we're
seeing very black-and-white kind of
coverage of important nuance to events
and so instead of the American people
getting a clear view of what's going on
in Ukraine or Syria or these different
places and there are two sides to these
stories we get sort of a one-sided
account being delivered by the New York
Times or The Washington Post or the
other major news organizations so
corrupt may be a little bit harsh but I
think it's it's it's kind of on point
two comments for you online arc rights
the Fourth Estate is in shambles
reporters jailed for reporting the truth
whistleblowers silenced hunted and
jailed integrity this listener rights
has become the black hat in this country
Ms Wright's I'm sorry but governments
have always tried to create a narrative
what concerns me more is the press
itself creating narrative purely for the
sake of its own agenda
those two parted ways you wrote about
White House or government perception
management if you see that is perfectly
aligned with the interest of the press
or it's not then what's the motivator
well I think I think I've talked about
theirs they're their financial
motivations for journalists who try to
keep their careers going forward but
what does that mean just satisfying a
kind of popular opinion to some extent I
mean there's idea well what's the
conventional wisdom and let's try to
keep our reporting within it if you if
you clash with the groupthink and I
would call a group think more than
conventional wisdom even if you clash
with the groupthink your careers in
jeopardy we saw that during the period
before the Iraq war and now what you're
seeing is even worse because President
Obama has been cracking down on
whistleblowers and what that means for a
journalist
especially covering national security is
that the the give-and-take that was that
was available when I was doing my work
in the 80s and even the 90s has has been
replaced by fear among the people in the
national security state and many of them
are honest people they see their job as
dealing with facts and sharing those
facts with the top leadership but when
when that may be politically is not very
popular with the political leadership
those people might want to talk to the
press but now they're extremely scared
because President Obama has authorized
the prosecution of people for even minor
mistakes like like as we certainly seen
with a number of these former CIA people
who have been thrown in jail and then
you have other whistleblowers who have
been prosecuted chelsea manning is in
jail for 35 years so you have this fear
that has been built up around anyone
talking to the press outside the
accepted approved leaks you see you'll
still get the leaks that will serve the
interests of what the government wants
the public to to believe but you won't
get the leaks that challenge what the
government's trying to feed you
William in Sunrise Beach Missouri
William you're on the air thanks for
calling yeah you've just opened up a
million doors of what I want to ask but
one my first main question was um the
movie that portrayed kill the messenger
that portrayed the journalist on the
West Coast I forgot his name
Gary Wellman are you familiar a very web
you crook were you were privy to any of
his article that she was breaking this
the cocaine connection also or were you
completely off on your own when you
started to have your revelations about
what was going on with this corruption
reminder to nutshell what happened there
robert Parry well basically the the
Contras the the the force that the US
was backing in Nicaragua got itself tied
up with cocaine trade some some that was
even back to the very founding of the
Contras back in 1980 when people
involved were also working with the
medina hotel at that point so you had
the so the Contras were deeply enmeshed
in the cocaine trade throughout the
1980s now that was obviously something
the Reagan administration didn't want
people to know because it would have
caused the Contras to be probably shut
down completely so anyway but so we be
at The Associated Press
Brian Barger and I were working on these
stories and we became aware of this and
reported initially in December of 1985
when it was still happening then and
then Senator John Kerry did a fairly
courageous investigation that followed
on our work and took it further and his
report came out in 1989 but it was
mostly laughed at just the New York
Times didn't take it seriously the
Washington Post basically made fun of it
and so the story kind of sits in limbo
until 1996 when Gary Webb at the San
Jose Mercury News comes upon information
in a way that we had not looked at his
his focus was really on the on the
impact of the cocaine once it got here
our reporting was more on the fact that
it was coming so he was able by finding
in criminal cases in Los Angeles to show
how it had that some of that cocaine had
fed into the crack epidemic which then
spread across the country so he writes
so he calls me actually before his first
story in 1996 and
and my advice to him is to make sure
that his editors are behind him I said
this is a very touchy story you know
you're going to get a lot of heat your
editors better be behind you or it's
going to be trouble for you and he said
no my editors are behind me so he went
ahead with his stories for the San Jose
Mercury News and and then the black
communities around the country got very
upset about this as you might expect and
then it became something that had to be
put down and the New York Times and The
Washington Post and the Los Angeles
Times all ganged up on Gary Webb it was
sort of easier it was harder for them to
admit they'd screwed up on a major story
like this in the 80s and some of the
people who had written had sort of put
ours down back then we're now senior
people in those news organizations
they'd risen in terms of their position
so it was easier to destroy Gary Webb
than to revisit this difficult scandal
but what Webb did which was very
important of course he his career was
then ruined he was driven out of
journalism he ultimately commit suicide
in 2004 he can't find any work and his
whole life has fallen apart and that's
sort of what the movie deals was but but
you did do something very very important
he got the Central Intelligence Agency's
Inspector General to do an investigation
and was the first serious investigation
and in 1998 the CIA comes out with two
reports essentially confessing the
agency confessed to to being to being
well aware that the Contras were
involved in the drug trade from the very
beginning all the way through to the end
from 18th from 1980 to 1990 and that was
an amazing admission but again the major
news organizations essentially didn't
want to deal with that either because it
made them look bad so they kind of
kissed it off and the American people
never got us a real sense of what the
truth was even though the CIA had
admitted it by and large so that's the
kind of problem you have when the news
media stops being responsible to tell
the public what he needs to know and is
more concerned about careers and not
rocking the boat and and staying in line
with what the government sort of wants
you to know and we saw a complete
failure at that point and we've seen
that failure continue
subsequent to that failure you had the
failure of the Iraq war so you have you
have the American press really leaving
the American people kind of out on their
own to figure things out and it's a and
it's very difficult that's one of the
reasons I started Consortium news.com in
1995 was to try to deal with some of
those well reported well documented
stories we're not talking conspiracy
theories by any means these are real
events that happened in our country that
affected us but that had been Ribera
Singh to the government and were
therefore shunted aside robert Parry it
is a very admirable personal history
that you brought to journalism not an
easy path to go up against powers that
don't want those stories told but you've
done it again and again honored last
week with the if' stone medal for
journalistic independence you give us a
lot to think about here about how the
American people can try and lean toward
more light and clarity in the reporting
they get I hope we can talk another time
about your advice on that front but for
today congratulations to you please keep
doing it and thank you very much for
being with us this hour thank you Tom
Robert Perry award-winning investigative
reporter author documentary filmmaker
winner of the 2015 I have stone medal
for journalistic independence I'm Tom
Ashbrook this is on point
[Music]